docs/3D_FLIP_ANIMATIONS.md, before:

# 3D Flip Animations Implementation

## Overview

This document describes the implementation of 3D flip animations for flashcards across all study components in the flashcard app. The animations provide a realistic card-flipping experience that enhances user engagement while maintaining accessibility and performance.

## Features

### Visual Effects
- **Realistic 3D rotation**: Cards flip along the Y-axis (horizontal flip) with proper perspective
- **Smooth transitions**: 0.6s duration with cubic-bezier easing for natural motion
- **Hardware acceleration**: Uses CSS transforms for optimal performance
- **Cross-browser compatibility**: Fallback animations for browsers without 3D transform support

### Trigger Conditions
The flip animation activates when:
- User clicks anywhere on the flashcard
- User presses Space or Enter key when card is focused
- Programmatic flip calls are made through `handleFlipCard()`

### Integration
- **StudySession.tsx**: Click-anywhere flip with keyboard shortcuts
- **SpacedRepetitionMode.tsx**: Click-anywhere flip (question side only) + button-based flip
- **StudyMode.tsx**: Button-based flip with 3D animation
- **DeckView.tsx**: Click-anywhere flip for card previews

## Technical Implementation

### CSS Architecture

#### Three-Layer Structure
1. **Container** (`.flashcard-container`): Provides 3D perspective
2. **Inner wrapper** (`.flashcard-inner`): The rotating element
3. **Card sides** (`.flashcard-front`, `.flashcard-back`): Individual faces

#### Core CSS Classes
```css
/* Container provides perspective for 3D effect */
.flashcard-container {
  perspective: 1000px;
  transform-style: preserve-3d;
}

/* Inner wrapper that rotates */
.flashcard-inner {
  position: relative;
  width: 100%;
  height: 100%;
  transition: transform 0.6s cubic-bezier(0.4, 0.0, 0.2, 1);
  transform-style: preserve-3d;
}

/* Flipped state rotates 180 degrees */
.flashcard-inner.flipped {
  transform: rotateY(180deg);
}

/* Common styles for both sides */
.flashcard-side {
  position: absolute;
  width: 100%;
  height: 100%;
  backface-visibility: hidden;
  border-radius: 0.5rem;
}

/* Front side (normal orientation) */
.flashcard-front {
  transform: rotateY(0deg);
}

/* Back side (pre-rotated 180 degrees) */
.flashcard-back {
  transform: rotateY(180deg);
}
```

### React Integration

#### State Management
```typescript
const [isFlipped, setIsFlipped] = useState(false);

const handleFlipCard = () => {
  setIsFlipped(!isFlipped);
};
```

#### JSX Structure
```typescript
<div className="flashcard-container">
  <div className={`flashcard-inner ${isFlipped ? 'flipped' : ''}`}>
    {/* Front side */}
    <div className="flashcard-side flashcard-front">
      {/* Question content */}
    </div>
    
    {/* Back side */}
    <div className="flashcard-side flashcard-back">
      {/* Answer content */}
    </div>
  </div>
</div>
```

## Browser Compatibility

### Modern Browser Support
- **Chrome/Edge**: Full 3D transform support with hardware acceleration
- **Firefox**: Full 3D transform support
- **Safari**: Full 3D transform support
- **Mobile browsers**: Optimized for touch devices

### Fallback Support
For browsers without 3D transform support:
```css
@supports not (transform-style: preserve-3d) {
  .flashcard-inner {
    transition: opacity 0.3s ease-in-out;
  }
  
  .flashcard-inner.flipped .flashcard-front {
    opacity: 0;
  }
  
  .flashcard-inner:not(.flipped) .flashcard-back {
    opacity: 0;
  }
}
```

## Performance Considerations

### Optimization Strategies
- **CSS transforms**: Hardware-accelerated animations
- **Minimal reflows**: Absolute positioning prevents layout shifts
- **Efficient transitions**: Single transform property animation
- **Memory management**: No JavaScript animation loops

### Best Practices
- Uses `transform` instead of changing layout properties
- Leverages `backface-visibility: hidden` for performance
- Applies `transform-style: preserve-3d` only where needed
- Optimized transition timing function

## Accessibility

### Maintained Features
- **Keyboard navigation**: Space/Enter keys still work
- **Screen reader support**: ARIA labels and roles preserved
- **Focus management**: Proper focus indicators maintained
- **Motion preferences**: Respects user's motion preferences

### Accessibility Considerations
- Animation duration is reasonable (0.6s) to avoid motion sickness
- Fallback animations for users who prefer reduced motion
- Content remains accessible during animation
- No flashing or rapid changes that could trigger seizures

## Testing

### Manual Testing Checklist
- [ ] Click flip works in all components
- [ ] Keyboard flip (Space/Enter) works
- [ ] Animation is smooth and realistic
- [ ] Fallback works in browsers without 3D support
- [ ] Accessibility features remain functional
- [ ] Performance is acceptable on mobile devices

### Browser Testing
- [ ] Chrome (latest)
- [ ] Firefox (latest)
- [ ] Safari (latest)
- [ ] Edge (latest)
- [ ] Mobile Safari
- [ ] Mobile Chrome

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues
1. **Animation not working**: Check if `transform-style: preserve-3d` is supported
2. **Flickering**: Ensure `backface-visibility: hidden` is applied
3. **Performance issues**: Verify hardware acceleration is enabled
4. **Content not visible**: Check z-index and positioning

### Debug Tips
- Use browser dev tools to inspect 3D transforms
- Check for CSS conflicts with existing styles
- Verify JavaScript state management is working
- Test with different screen sizes and orientations

## Future Enhancements

### Potential Improvements
1. **Animation customization**: User-selectable animation styles
2. **Motion preferences**: Respect `prefers-reduced-motion` setting
3. **Touch gestures**: Swipe-to-flip on mobile devices
4. **Sound effects**: Optional audio feedback
5. **Advanced animations**: Bounce effects, elastic easing

Commit message:

Fix UI glitch in study interface - ensure text appears within card background
- Fixed text positioning issues in SpacedRepetitionMode where question/answer text was appearing outside the card background
- Added explicit text color classes (text-slate-900 dark:text-slate-100) for better contrast in dark mode
- Added inline style for min-height to guarantee container dimensions
- Improved flexbox layout for flashcard content containers
- Updated BasicStudyMode with consistent text color classes
- Enhanced 3D flip animation CSS with better cross-browser compatibility
- Updated documentation with recent fixes and improvements

docs/3D_FLIP_ANIMATIONS.md, after:

# 3D Flip Animations Implementation

## Overview

This document describes the implementation of 3D flip animations for flashcards across all study components in the flashcard app. The animations provide a realistic card-flipping experience that enhances user engagement while maintaining accessibility and performance.

## Recent Fixes (2025-06-15)

### UI Glitch Resolution
Fixed several UI glitches in the study interface that were causing text visibility issues and layout problems:

#### Issues Resolved
1. **Text Visibility**: Question and answer text was not visible in dark mode due to missing color classes
2. **Layout Positioning**: Improved CSS positioning for better cross-browser compatibility
3. **Content Overflow**: Enhanced container styles to prevent content clipping

#### Changes Made
- **SpacedRepetitionMode.tsx**: Added explicit text color classes (`text-slate-900 dark:text-slate-100`) to question and answer text
- **BasicStudyMode.tsx**: Added explicit text color classes to question and answer text
- **index.css**: Enhanced CSS with improved layout rules and debugging styles for better text positioning

#### Technical Details
- Added `color: inherit` and proper text wrapping to ensure text is always visible
- Improved flexbox layout for content containers with `min-height` and proper centering
- Enhanced fallback styles for browsers without 3D transform support

## Features

### Visual Effects
- **Realistic 3D rotation**: Cards flip along the Y-axis (horizontal flip) with proper perspective
- **Smooth transitions**: 0.6s duration with cubic-bezier easing for natural motion
- **Hardware acceleration**: Uses CSS transforms for optimal performance
- **Cross-browser compatibility**: Fallback animations for browsers without 3D transform support

### Trigger Conditions
The flip animation activates when:
- User clicks anywhere on the flashcard
- User presses Space or Enter key when card is focused
- Programmatic flip calls are made through `handleFlipCard()`

### Integration
- **StudySession.tsx**: Click-anywhere flip with keyboard shortcuts
- **SpacedRepetitionMode.tsx**: Click-anywhere flip (question side only) + button-based flip
- **StudyMode.tsx**: Button-based flip with 3D animation
- **DeckView.tsx**: Click-anywhere flip for card previews

## Technical Implementation

### CSS Architecture

#### Three-Layer Structure
1. **Container** (`.flashcard-container`): Provides 3D perspective
2. **Inner wrapper** (`.flashcard-inner`): The rotating element
3. **Card sides** (`.flashcard-front`, `.flashcard-back`): Individual faces

#### Core CSS Classes
```css
/* Container provides perspective for 3D effect */
.flashcard-container {
  perspective: 1000px;
  transform-style: preserve-3d;
}

/* Inner wrapper that rotates */
.flashcard-inner {
  position: relative;
  width: 100%;
  height: 100%;
  transition: transform 0.6s cubic-bezier(0.4, 0.0, 0.2, 1);
  transform-style: preserve-3d;
}

/* Flipped state rotates 180 degrees */
.flashcard-inner.flipped {
  transform: rotateY(180deg);
}

/* Common styles for both sides */
.flashcard-side {
  position: absolute;
  width: 100%;
  height: 100%;
  backface-visibility: hidden;
  border-radius: 0.5rem;
}

/* Front side (normal orientation) */
.flashcard-front {
  transform: rotateY(0deg);
}

/* Back side (pre-rotated 180 degrees) */
.flashcard-back {
  transform: rotateY(180deg);
}
```

### React Integration

#### State Management
```typescript
const [isFlipped, setIsFlipped] = useState(false);

const handleFlipCard = () => {
  setIsFlipped(!isFlipped);
};
```

#### JSX Structure
```typescript
<div className="flashcard-container">
  <div className={`flashcard-inner ${isFlipped ? 'flipped' : ''}`}>
    {/* Front side */}
    <div className="flashcard-side flashcard-front">
      {/* Question content */}
    </div>
    
    {/* Back side */}
    <div className="flashcard-side flashcard-back">
      {/* Answer content */}
    </div>
  </div>
</div>
```

## Browser Compatibility

### Modern Browser Support
- **Chrome/Edge**: Full 3D transform support with hardware acceleration
- **Firefox**: Full 3D transform support
- **Safari**: Full 3D transform support
- **Mobile browsers**: Optimized for touch devices

### Fallback Support
For browsers without 3D transform support:
```css
@supports not (transform-style: preserve-3d) {
  .flashcard-inner {
    transition: opacity 0.3s ease-in-out;
  }
  
  .flashcard-inner.flipped .flashcard-front {
    opacity: 0;
  }
  
  .flashcard-inner:not(.flipped) .flashcard-back {
    opacity: 0;
  }
}
```

## Performance Considerations

### Optimization Strategies
- **CSS transforms**: Hardware-accelerated animations
- **Minimal reflows**: Absolute positioning prevents layout shifts
- **Efficient transitions**: Single transform property animation
- **Memory management**: No JavaScript animation loops

### Best Practices
- Uses `transform` instead of changing layout properties
- Leverages `backface-visibility: hidden` for performance
- Applies `transform-style: preserve-3d` only where needed
- Optimized transition timing function

## Accessibility

### Maintained Features
- **Keyboard navigation**: Space/Enter keys still work
- **Screen reader support**: ARIA labels and roles preserved
- **Focus management**: Proper focus indicators maintained
- **Motion preferences**: Respects user's motion preferences

### Accessibility Considerations
- Animation duration is reasonable (0.6s) to avoid motion sickness
- Fallback animations for users who prefer reduced motion
- Content remains accessible during animation
- No flashing or rapid changes that could trigger seizures

## Testing

### Manual Testing Checklist
- [ ] Click flip works in all components
- [ ] Keyboard flip (Space/Enter) works
- [ ] Animation is smooth and realistic
- [ ] Fallback works in browsers without 3D support
- [ ] Accessibility features remain functional
- [ ] Performance is acceptable on mobile devices

### Browser Testing
- [ ] Chrome (latest)
- [ ] Firefox (latest)
- [ ] Safari (latest)
- [ ] Edge (latest)
- [ ] Mobile Safari
- [ ] Mobile Chrome

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues
1. **Animation not working**: Check if `transform-style: preserve-3d` is supported
2. **Flickering**: Ensure `backface-visibility: hidden` is applied
3. **Performance issues**: Verify hardware acceleration is enabled
4. **Content not visible**: Check z-index and positioning

### Debug Tips
- Use browser dev tools to inspect 3D transforms
- Check for CSS conflicts with existing styles
- Verify JavaScript state management is working
- Test with different screen sizes and orientations

## Future Enhancements

### Potential Improvements
1. **Animation customization**: User-selectable animation styles
2. **Motion preferences**: Respect `prefers-reduced-motion` setting
3. **Touch gestures**: Swipe-to-flip on mobile devices
4. **Sound effects**: Optional audio feedback
5. **Advanced animations**: Bounce effects, elastic easing
