docs/STATISTICS_DASHBOARD.md, before:

# Statistics Dashboard Implementation

## Overview

The Statistics Dashboard provides comprehensive analytics and insights for the flashcard learning app, offering users detailed visibility into their learning progress, performance metrics, and study patterns.

## Type Safety Improvements

### Interface Consolidation and Type Safety

The statistics dashboard components have been refactored to use consolidated, well-defined TypeScript interfaces that match the actual Convex query return structures, improving type safety and maintainability.

**Benefits:**
- **Consistent Type Definitions**: Centralized interfaces that match actual query return shapes
- **Improved Type Safety**: Proper handling of optional properties (`retentionRate?`, `averageInterval?`)
- **Better Developer Experience**: Clear TypeScript intellisense and error detection
- **Reduced Code Duplication**: Shared interfaces across related components

**Implementation:**
```typescript
// Consolidated type definitions that match Convex query structures
interface UserStats {
  totalDecks: number;
  totalCards: number;
  totalStudySessions: number;
  cardsStudiedToday: number;
  currentStreak: number;
  longestStreak: number;
  averageSessionDuration?: number;
  totalStudyTime?: number;
}

interface SpacedRepetitionInsights {
  totalDueCards: number;
  totalNewCards: number;
  cardsToReviewToday: number;
  upcomingReviews: Array<{
    date: string;
    count: number;
  }>;
  retentionRate?: number;
  averageInterval?: number;
}
```

**Refactored Components:**
- `StatisticsOverviewCards.tsx` - Now uses consolidated `UserStats` and `SpacedRepetitionInsights` interfaces
- `SpacedRepetitionInsights.tsx` - Now uses consolidated `SpacedRepetitionInsights` interface

**Note on Type Inference:**
While we initially attempted to use Convex's `FunctionReturnType` utility for automatic type inference, we discovered that the current implementation sets some optional properties (like `retentionRate`) to explicit `undefined` values, which causes TypeScript to infer them as `never` type instead of `number | undefined`. The manual interface approach provides better type safety and developer experience in this case.

## Features

### 📊 **Visual Design**
- **Dark Theme**: Sophisticated color palette with cohesive blue-cyan gradient system (#3b82f6/#06b6d4) and warm amber accents (#f59e0b)
- **Modern UI**: Clean, minimalist interface following current UI/UX best practices
- **Responsive Layout**: Grid-based design that works seamlessly on desktop and mobile
- **Smooth Animations**: Micro-interactions and transitions for enhanced user experience

### 📈 **Data Visualization Components**

#### Overview Cards
- Total decks, cards, and study sessions
- Current and longest learning streaks
- Due cards and new cards counts
- Retention rates and average intervals

#### Study Activity Chart
- Interactive area chart showing study patterns over time
- Multiple metrics: cards studied, sessions, time spent
- Configurable date ranges (7d, 30d, 90d, all time)
- Beautiful gradient fills and hover effects

#### Deck Performance Chart
- Interactive bar chart comparing deck mastery levels
- Color-coded performance indicators
- Click-to-select functionality for detailed views
- Performance categories: Needs Work, Fair, Good, Excellent

#### Card Distribution Chart
- Donut chart showing card distribution across learning stages
- Categories: New, Learning, Review, Due, Mastered
- Interactive segments with detailed tooltips
- Summary statistics below the chart

### 🎯 **Specialized Widgets**

#### Upcoming Reviews Widget
- Schedule of upcoming review sessions
- Color-coded urgency indicators (today, tomorrow, soon, later)
- Card counts per review date
- Summary statistics

#### Learning Streak Widget
- Circular progress indicator for current streak
- Motivational messaging based on streak length
- Milestone tracking and achievement badges
- Progress towards next milestone

#### Spaced Repetition Insights
- Algorithm performance metrics
- Retention rate analysis
- Average interval efficiency
- Workload balance (new vs review cards)
- Algorithm optimization tips

### 🔧 **Technical Features**

#### Real-time Data Integration
- Convex queries for live data updates
- Optimized database queries with proper indexing
- Efficient data aggregation and caching

#### Export Capabilities
- CSV export for basic statistics
- JSON export for complete data dump
- Automatic file download with timestamped filenames

#### Filter Options
- Date range selection (7d, 30d, 90d, all time)
- Deck-specific filtering (planned)
- Study mode filtering (planned)

#### Accessibility
- Proper ARIA labels and roles
- Keyboard navigation support
- Screen reader compatibility
- Reduced motion preferences respected

## File Structure

```
src/components/
├── StatisticsDashboard.tsx              # Main dashboard component
├── statistics/
│   ├── ChartWidget.tsx                  # Reusable chart container component
│   ├── StatisticsOverviewCards.tsx      # Overview metrics cards
│   ├── StudyActivityChart.tsx           # Time-series activity chart
│   ├── DeckPerformanceChart.tsx         # Deck comparison chart
│   ├── CardDistributionChart.tsx        # Card stage distribution
│   ├── UpcomingReviewsWidget.tsx        # Review schedule widget
│   ├── LearningStreakWidget.tsx         # Streak tracking widget
│   └── SpacedRepetitionInsights.tsx     # Algorithm insights
├── skeletons/
│   └── StatisticsSkeleton.tsx           # Loading state components
└── __tests__/
    ├── StatisticsDashboard.test.tsx     # Unit tests
    └── statistics/
        └── ChartWidget.test.tsx         # ChartWidget unit tests

convex/
└── statistics.ts                        # Backend statistics queries

docs/
└── STATISTICS_DASHBOARD.md             # This documentation
```

## Key Components

### ChartWidget
Reusable container component that eliminates code duplication across chart components:

**Features:**
- **Consistent Styling**: Standardized dark theme with slate colors and responsive design
- **Flexible Structure**: Configurable title, subtitle, header actions, and footer content
- **Customizable Height**: Adjustable chart container height (default: h-80)
- **Accessibility**: Proper heading structure and semantic markup
- **TypeScript Support**: Fully typed props with comprehensive interfaces

**Usage Example:**
```tsx
<ChartWidget
  title="Study Activity"
  subtitle="Track your learning progress over time"
  chartHeight="h-80"
  headerActions={<button>Export</button>}
  footer={<div>Summary stats...</div>}
>
  <ResponsiveContainer width="100%" height="100%">
    <AreaChart data={data}>
      // Chart content...
    </AreaChart>
  </ResponsiveContainer>
</ChartWidget>
```

**Benefits:**
- Eliminates 15-20 lines of duplicated code per chart component
- Ensures consistent styling across all dashboard widgets
- Centralizes widget styling for easier maintenance
- Improves code maintainability and reduces styling inconsistencies

## Backend Queries

### `getUserStatistics`
Returns comprehensive user-level statistics using real study session data:
- Total decks and cards (from database)
- Study session counts (from studySessions table)
- Learning streaks (calculated from daily study patterns)
- Average session duration (from recorded session durations)
- Total study time (aggregated from all sessions)
- Cards studied today (from today's sessions)

### `getDeckStatistics`
Provides detailed statistics for a specific deck using real data:
- Card distribution by learning stage (based on repetition counts)
- Average ease factor (calculated from card data)
- Success rates (estimated from card progression)
- Last studied timestamp (from most recent study session)

### `getSpacedRepetitionInsights`
Analyzes spaced repetition algorithm performance with real card data:
- Due and new card counts (from card due dates and repetition counts)
- Upcoming review schedule (calculated from card due dates)
- Retention rates (calculated from card progression patterns)
- Average intervals (from card interval data)

### `getDeckPerformanceComparison`
Compares performance across all user decks using real metrics:
- Mastery percentages (based on card repetition thresholds)
- Card counts and progress (from actual card data)
- Average ease factors (calculated from card ease factors)
- Last studied dates (from most recent study sessions per deck)

### `getStudyActivityData`
Provides time-series study activity data for charts:
- Daily study activity over configurable date ranges (7d, 30d, 90d, all)
- Cards studied per day (from study sessions)
- Session counts per day
- Time spent studying (from session durations)
- Study streaks (calculated from consecutive study days)

### `getCardDistributionData`
Returns detailed card distribution across learning stages:
- New cards (repetition = 0)
- Learning cards (repetition 1-2)
- Review cards (repetition 3-7)
- Due cards (cards past their due date)
- Mastered cards (repetition 8+)
- Total card counts

## Usage

### Navigation
Access the statistics dashboard from the main dashboard by clicking the "Statistics" button in the header.

### Interactions
- **Charts**: Hover for detailed tooltips, click bars for selection
- **Date Ranges**: Use dropdown to filter time periods
- **Export**: Select format from export dropdown for data download
- **Back Navigation**: Use back button to return to main dashboard

### Data Interpretation

#### Performance Colors
- 🔴 **Red (0-40%)**: Needs Work - Cards require more frequent review
- 🟠 **Orange (40-60%)**: Fair - Moderate progress, room for improvement
- 🟡 **Yellow (60-80%)**: Good - Solid progress, on track
- 🟢 **Green (80%+)**: Excellent - Strong mastery, well-learned

#### Streak Milestones
- 🌱 **1-6 days**: Building momentum
- 🔥 **7-29 days**: Weekly warrior, on fire!
- ⚡ **30-99 days**: Monthly master, incredible dedication
- 👑 **100+ days**: Century club, legendary learner

## Performance Optimizations

### Database Efficiency
- **Unified Dashboard Query**: Single `getDashboardData` query consolidates multiple statistics queries for better performance
- Compound indexes for optimal query performance
- Aggregated counts stored on parent documents
- Efficient filtering using database-level operations
- Atomic data updates ensuring UI consistency across dashboard components

### Frontend Optimizations
- **Consolidated Data Fetching**: Single useQuery hook replaces multiple separate queries
- **Simplified Loading States**: Single loading state instead of multiple conditional checks
- Lazy loading of chart components
- Skeleton loaders for smooth loading states
- Memoized components to prevent unnecessary re-renders
- Optimized chart rendering with Recharts

### Memory Management
- Efficient data structures for chart data
- Proper cleanup of event listeners
- Optimized re-rendering with React.memo

## Testing

### Unit Tests
- Component rendering and interaction tests
- Mock implementations for chart libraries
- Export functionality testing
- Loading state verification

### Integration Tests
- End-to-end user workflows
- Data flow from backend to frontend
- Cross-component interactions

## Future Enhancements

### Planned Features
- **Advanced Filtering**: Filter by specific decks, study modes, date ranges
- **Goal Setting**: Set and track learning goals with progress indicators
- **Comparative Analytics**: Compare performance across different time periods
- **Study Recommendations**: AI-powered suggestions based on performance data
- **Social Features**: Compare progress with friends (optional)

### Technical Improvements
- **Real-time Updates**: WebSocket integration for live data updates
- **Advanced Charts**: More chart types (heatmaps, scatter plots, etc.)
- **Data Caching**: Implement client-side caching for better performance
- **Offline Support**: Cache statistics for offline viewing

## Dependencies

### Core Libraries
- **React**: Component framework
- **Recharts**: Chart visualization library
- **Convex**: Real-time database and backend
- **Tailwind CSS**: Styling framework

### Development Dependencies
- **TypeScript**: Type safety
- **Jest**: Unit testing framework
- **React Testing Library**: Component testing utilities

## Accessibility Compliance

The statistics dashboard follows WCAG 2.1 AA guidelines:
- Proper color contrast ratios
- Keyboard navigation support
- Screen reader compatibility
- Alternative text for visual elements
- Reduced motion preferences

## Browser Support

- **Modern Browsers**: Chrome 90+, Firefox 88+, Safari 14+, Edge 90+
- **Mobile Browsers**: iOS Safari 14+, Chrome Mobile 90+
- **Responsive Design**: Optimized for screens 320px and above

## Performance Metrics

- **Initial Load**: < 2 seconds on 3G connection
- **Chart Rendering**: < 500ms for typical datasets
- **Export Generation**: < 1 second for standard data volumes
- **Memory Usage**: < 50MB for typical usage patterns

Commit message:

fix: correct React key prop in UpcomingReviewsWidget
- Fixed TypeScript errors where cardId and nextReviewDate properties were accessed but didn't exist on UpcomingReview interface
- Changed React key from cardId-nextReviewDate to date-count to use existing properties
- Updated documentation to clarify UpcomingReviewsWidget data structure
- All tests passing, no breaking changes to functionality

docs/STATISTICS_DASHBOARD.md, after:

# Statistics Dashboard Implementation

## Overview

The Statistics Dashboard provides comprehensive analytics and insights for the flashcard learning app, offering users detailed visibility into their learning progress, performance metrics, and study patterns.

## Type Safety Improvements

### Interface Consolidation and Type Safety

The statistics dashboard components have been refactored to use consolidated, well-defined TypeScript interfaces that match the actual Convex query return structures, improving type safety and maintainability.

**Benefits:**
- **Consistent Type Definitions**: Centralized interfaces that match actual query return shapes
- **Improved Type Safety**: Proper handling of optional properties (`retentionRate?`, `averageInterval?`)
- **Better Developer Experience**: Clear TypeScript intellisense and error detection
- **Reduced Code Duplication**: Shared interfaces across related components

**Implementation:**
```typescript
// Consolidated type definitions that match Convex query structures
interface UserStats {
  totalDecks: number;
  totalCards: number;
  totalStudySessions: number;
  cardsStudiedToday: number;
  currentStreak: number;
  longestStreak: number;
  averageSessionDuration?: number;
  totalStudyTime?: number;
}

interface SpacedRepetitionInsights {
  totalDueCards: number;
  totalNewCards: number;
  cardsToReviewToday: number;
  upcomingReviews: Array<{
    date: string;
    count: number;
  }>;
  retentionRate?: number;
  averageInterval?: number;
}
```

**Refactored Components:**
- `StatisticsOverviewCards.tsx` - Now uses consolidated `UserStats` and `SpacedRepetitionInsights` interfaces
- `SpacedRepetitionInsights.tsx` - Now uses consolidated `SpacedRepetitionInsights` interface

**Note on Type Inference:**
While we initially attempted to use Convex's `FunctionReturnType` utility for automatic type inference, we discovered that the current implementation sets some optional properties (like `retentionRate`) to explicit `undefined` values, which causes TypeScript to infer them as `never` type instead of `number | undefined`. The manual interface approach provides better type safety and developer experience in this case.

## Features

### 📊 **Visual Design**
- **Dark Theme**: Sophisticated color palette with cohesive blue-cyan gradient system (#3b82f6/#06b6d4) and warm amber accents (#f59e0b)
- **Modern UI**: Clean, minimalist interface following current UI/UX best practices
- **Responsive Layout**: Grid-based design that works seamlessly on desktop and mobile
- **Smooth Animations**: Micro-interactions and transitions for enhanced user experience

### 📈 **Data Visualization Components**

#### Overview Cards
- Total decks, cards, and study sessions
- Current and longest learning streaks
- Due cards and new cards counts
- Retention rates and average intervals

#### Study Activity Chart
- Interactive area chart showing study patterns over time
- Multiple metrics: cards studied, sessions, time spent
- Configurable date ranges (7d, 30d, 90d, all time)
- Beautiful gradient fills and hover effects

#### Deck Performance Chart
- Interactive bar chart comparing deck mastery levels
- Color-coded performance indicators
- Click-to-select functionality for detailed views
- Performance categories: Needs Work, Fair, Good, Excellent

#### Card Distribution Chart
- Donut chart showing card distribution across learning stages
- Categories: New, Learning, Review, Due, Mastered
- Interactive segments with detailed tooltips
- Summary statistics below the chart

### 🎯 **Specialized Widgets**

#### Upcoming Reviews Widget
- Schedule of upcoming review sessions
- Color-coded urgency indicators (today, tomorrow, soon, later)
- Card counts per review date
- Summary statistics
- **Data Structure**: Uses aggregated review data with `date` and `count` properties for efficient rendering

#### Learning Streak Widget
- Circular progress indicator for current streak
- Motivational messaging based on streak length
- Milestone tracking and achievement badges
- Progress towards next milestone

#### Spaced Repetition Insights
- Algorithm performance metrics
- Retention rate analysis
- Average interval efficiency
- Workload balance (new vs review cards)
- Algorithm optimization tips

### 🔧 **Technical Features**

#### Real-time Data Integration
- Convex queries for live data updates
- Optimized database queries with proper indexing
- Efficient data aggregation and caching

#### Export Capabilities
- CSV export for basic statistics
- JSON export for complete data dump
- Automatic file download with timestamped filenames

#### Filter Options
- Date range selection (7d, 30d, 90d, all time)
- Deck-specific filtering (planned)
- Study mode filtering (planned)

#### Accessibility
- Proper ARIA labels and roles
- Keyboard navigation support
- Screen reader compatibility
- Reduced motion preferences respected

## File Structure

```
src/components/
├── StatisticsDashboard.tsx              # Main dashboard component
├── statistics/
│   ├── ChartWidget.tsx                  # Reusable chart container component
│   ├── StatisticsOverviewCards.tsx      # Overview metrics cards
│   ├── StudyActivityChart.tsx           # Time-series activity chart
│   ├── DeckPerformanceChart.tsx         # Deck comparison chart
│   ├── CardDistributionChart.tsx        # Card stage distribution
│   ├── UpcomingReviewsWidget.tsx        # Review schedule widget
│   ├── LearningStreakWidget.tsx         # Streak tracking widget
│   └── SpacedRepetitionInsights.tsx     # Algorithm insights
├── skeletons/
│   └── StatisticsSkeleton.tsx           # Loading state components
└── __tests__/
    ├── StatisticsDashboard.test.tsx     # Unit tests
    └── statistics/
        └── ChartWidget.test.tsx         # ChartWidget unit tests

convex/
└── statistics.ts                        # Backend statistics queries

docs/
└── STATISTICS_DASHBOARD.md             # This documentation
```

## Key Components

### ChartWidget
Reusable container component that eliminates code duplication across chart components:

**Features:**
- **Consistent Styling**: Standardized dark theme with slate colors and responsive design
- **Flexible Structure**: Configurable title, subtitle, header actions, and footer content
- **Customizable Height**: Adjustable chart container height (default: h-80)
- **Accessibility**: Proper heading structure and semantic markup
- **TypeScript Support**: Fully typed props with comprehensive interfaces

**Usage Example:**
```tsx
<ChartWidget
  title="Study Activity"
  subtitle="Track your learning progress over time"
  chartHeight="h-80"
  headerActions={<button>Export</button>}
  footer={<div>Summary stats...</div>}
>
  <ResponsiveContainer width="100%" height="100%">
    <AreaChart data={data}>
      // Chart content...
    </AreaChart>
  </ResponsiveContainer>
</ChartWidget>
```

**Benefits:**
- Eliminates 15-20 lines of duplicated code per chart component
- Ensures consistent styling across all dashboard widgets
- Centralizes widget styling for easier maintenance
- Improves code maintainability and reduces styling inconsistencies

## Backend Queries

### `getUserStatistics`
Returns comprehensive user-level statistics using real study session data:
- Total decks and cards (from database)
- Study session counts (from studySessions table)
- Learning streaks (calculated from daily study patterns)
- Average session duration (from recorded session durations)
- Total study time (aggregated from all sessions)
- Cards studied today (from today's sessions)

### `getDeckStatistics`
Provides detailed statistics for a specific deck using real data:
- Card distribution by learning stage (based on repetition counts)
- Average ease factor (calculated from card data)
- Success rates (estimated from card progression)
- Last studied timestamp (from most recent study session)

### `getSpacedRepetitionInsights`
Analyzes spaced repetition algorithm performance with real card data:
- Due and new card counts (from card due dates and repetition counts)
- Upcoming review schedule (calculated from card due dates)
- Retention rates (calculated from card progression patterns)
- Average intervals (from card interval data)

### `getDeckPerformanceComparison`
Compares performance across all user decks using real metrics:
- Mastery percentages (based on card repetition thresholds)
- Card counts and progress (from actual card data)
- Average ease factors (calculated from card ease factors)
- Last studied dates (from most recent study sessions per deck)

### `getStudyActivityData`
Provides time-series study activity data for charts:
- Daily study activity over configurable date ranges (7d, 30d, 90d, all)
- Cards studied per day (from study sessions)
- Session counts per day
- Time spent studying (from session durations)
- Study streaks (calculated from consecutive study days)

### `getCardDistributionData`
Returns detailed card distribution across learning stages:
- New cards (repetition = 0)
- Learning cards (repetition 1-2)
- Review cards (repetition 3-7)
- Due cards (cards past their due date)
- Mastered cards (repetition 8+)
- Total card counts

## Usage

### Navigation
Access the statistics dashboard from the main dashboard by clicking the "Statistics" button in the header.

### Interactions
- **Charts**: Hover for detailed tooltips, click bars for selection
- **Date Ranges**: Use dropdown to filter time periods
- **Export**: Select format from export dropdown for data download
- **Back Navigation**: Use back button to return to main dashboard

### Data Interpretation

#### Performance Colors
- 🔴 **Red (0-40%)**: Needs Work - Cards require more frequent review
- 🟠 **Orange (40-60%)**: Fair - Moderate progress, room for improvement
- 🟡 **Yellow (60-80%)**: Good - Solid progress, on track
- 🟢 **Green (80%+)**: Excellent - Strong mastery, well-learned

#### Streak Milestones
- 🌱 **1-6 days**: Building momentum
- 🔥 **7-29 days**: Weekly warrior, on fire!
- ⚡ **30-99 days**: Monthly master, incredible dedication
- 👑 **100+ days**: Century club, legendary learner

## Performance Optimizations

### Database Efficiency
- **Unified Dashboard Query**: Single `getDashboardData` query consolidates multiple statistics queries for better performance
- Compound indexes for optimal query performance
- Aggregated counts stored on parent documents
- Efficient filtering using database-level operations
- Atomic data updates ensuring UI consistency across dashboard components

### Frontend Optimizations
- **Consolidated Data Fetching**: Single useQuery hook replaces multiple separate queries
- **Simplified Loading States**: Single loading state instead of multiple conditional checks
- Lazy loading of chart components
- Skeleton loaders for smooth loading states
- Memoized components to prevent unnecessary re-renders
- Optimized chart rendering with Recharts

### Memory Management
- Efficient data structures for chart data
- Proper cleanup of event listeners
- Optimized re-rendering with React.memo

## Testing

### Unit Tests
- Component rendering and interaction tests
- Mock implementations for chart libraries
- Export functionality testing
- Loading state verification

### Integration Tests
- End-to-end user workflows
- Data flow from backend to frontend
- Cross-component interactions

## Future Enhancements

### Planned Features
- **Advanced Filtering**: Filter by specific decks, study modes, date ranges
- **Goal Setting**: Set and track learning goals with progress indicators
- **Comparative Analytics**: Compare performance across different time periods
- **Study Recommendations**: AI-powered suggestions based on performance data
- **Social Features**: Compare progress with friends (optional)

### Technical Improvements
- **Real-time Updates**: WebSocket integration for live data updates
- **Advanced Charts**: More chart types (heatmaps, scatter plots, etc.)
- **Data Caching**: Implement client-side caching for better performance
- **Offline Support**: Cache statistics for offline viewing

## Dependencies

### Core Libraries
- **React**: Component framework
- **Recharts**: Chart visualization library
- **Convex**: Real-time database and backend
- **Tailwind CSS**: Styling framework

### Development Dependencies
- **TypeScript**: Type safety
- **Jest**: Unit testing framework
- **React Testing Library**: Component testing utilities

## Accessibility Compliance

The statistics dashboard follows WCAG 2.1 AA guidelines:
- Proper color contrast ratios
- Keyboard navigation support
- Screen reader compatibility
- Alternative text for visual elements
- Reduced motion preferences

## Browser Support

- **Modern Browsers**: Chrome 90+, Firefox 88+, Safari 14+, Edge 90+
- **Mobile Browsers**: iOS Safari 14+, Chrome Mobile 90+
- **Responsive Design**: Optimized for screens 320px and above

## Performance Metrics

- **Initial Load**: < 2 seconds on 3G connection
- **Chart Rendering**: < 500ms for typical datasets
- **Export Generation**: < 1 second for standard data volumes
- **Memory Usage**: < 50MB for typical usage patterns
